testing testing aha now now we appear to
be working okay so now I need to
share this
Okay so
thanks Paul uh it should be working now
is that right just let me know I can see
a little Green Dot
wonderful I don't know why I have these
problems with live streaming I want to
be able to
uh simulcast both YouTube and Twitter
and I've got software to do this but for
the life of me it never seems to work
it's 50 of the time the YouTube alone
works as we just saw everything at my
end is working but YouTube just wasn't
picking up the audio I don't know why
but now we are fixed now I have so many
questions I'm just going to dive
straight into them in no particular
order and as I always say during these
live streams forgive the fact I have a
number of beverages that I will be
drinking throughout this to keep myself
hydrated so uh everything from water
through to Coke and the protein shake as
well so that's going to be happening as
well my screen in the back will
periodically go on and then off again I
don't know why that happens either
so all sorts of technical problems but
that aside you don't need to know how
the uh
cookie is made what the sausage is made
Let's just dive straight in
uh
thibolt asks
it's rare the device works but still
allows for advice how did you become so
good at communication what's your advice
in particular oral communication for
example on air chat you seemingly can
explain anything off the cuff with great
eloquence
well thank you tupold
um
for the compliment I don't know how true
that is
all I can say is I recall
as a student and I don't blame school
for this by the way
I think everyone kind of grow up grows
up this way
I didn't like speaking in front of
groups of people
and simply because I didn't like
speaking in front of groups of people
I coerced myself into doing it I thought
I want
to do that thing that I saw other people
doing
I saw my teachers and admired the fact
they were eloquent
I saw popularizers of science that I
admired and I thought I want to do that
I want to be able to speak off the cuff
without arms and R's without too many
pauses and as you say have a certain
degree of eloquence in doing so I wanted
to know what I was talking about that
was one thing and then I wanted to be
able to explain the thing that I had
knowledge of
in a way that didn't make me scared
Jerry Seinfeld has that great line any
stand-up routine that
of all people's fears when you survey
them death is number two
so what's number one the number one
greatest fear that people have
is public speaking
so at a funeral most people would prefer
to be in the casket than delivering the
eulogy
now I don't know whether that's true or
not of course but but
I
knew that I felt within me a fear of
speaking publicly and so in the same way
that you know some people have a fear of
water you just got to dive in and so I
started doing that every opportunity I
had at school to speak in front of a
group of people I would take it and it
was very uncomfortable for a long time
and then I got over it
and then I became more proficient I
became first I actually became a science
Communicator at University because
that's really what I wanted to do
there's this fellow in Australia his
name is Dr Carl Dr Carl kruzelnicki or
krzylinsky and I think he has a Polish
background but he's an Aussie and he's
often on the radio and he was just
someone that I grew up with he's still
around he's on
uh Twitter
and he would just answer random
questions from people
and I really admired this guy he had all
these degrees that was the first thing
he seemed to know about everything from
medicine through to how to fix a car and
indeed he was a car mechanic and a taxi
driver and he was a medical doctor and
he was a scientist he did degrees in
physics and so he had all this knowledge
there and so he'd go on the radio and
just answer people's random questions
and I thought that's so cool I wish I
could do that
and so not only did I start learning the
content so to speak I was just
interested in everything
but I took every opportunity to talk
about this stuff as well and so
when I went to University
and not only were there courses in
science communication they were rubbish
never mind that I took like one subject
and it was a complete waste of time
but there was actually a job you could
do you could work for this place now
defunct at the University of New South
Wales where I was called the Outreach
Center for Sciences
and they were paying students to be
science communicators I thought this is
it this is my ideal job
and up until that point in order to pay
my way through University as I've told
the story often I was a security guard
I was a mall cop and that's what I did
I'd go to university lectures tutorials
and labs and then when I finished that
I'd go off to a shopping center huge
shopping center still exists big
shopping mall
and I do laps of the shopping center and
get paid to you know arrest criminals
Patrol do all the usual things that a
mall cop would do
but it was hard work it was stressful no
one ever calls the mall cop because they
want to tell you I've got this lovely
person in my shop I'd like you to come
and meet them though it's always the
worst possible situation that day for
that shopkeeper or for the people the
customers and you have to come and solve
the problem so
well that was fun and exciting sometimes
it was terribly boring and other times
and I was able to
mix in my studies with that job because
there will be long stretches especially
at night
where there'll be very little to do
and I'd carry around my notebook
ostensibly for making notes but it would
be filled with my University study
my physics formula my mathematics
chemistry all that stuff
philosophy and I'll be wandering around
the shopping center at night
doing my job looking around but you know
now and again reading the notes so
that's how I memorize and commit to
memory a lot of this stuff
but when the job was advertised at
University
for
uh to be a science Communicator with the
Outreach Center for Science so I thought
this is amazing
and I was desperate to get this job and
I went for an interview and you had to
they gave us an article I can't remember
what the article was
something about
something about how the eye works
and you had to explain it to this panel
of people
and you know it was sort of 10 minutes
before we went into the interview they
said here's this article read this
article I want you to come in and
present it to us I thought that's a good
test you know that's a good test can can
I absorb what's here in this article and
then represent it to people and I did it
I thought I did pretty well
the job
and it was a fantastic job
we'd travel around to schools promoting
the University
and I do chemistry shows so I got to
learn how to use liquid nitrogen the
remarkable thing with the liquid
nitrogen I did all the classic stuff
that you do with liquid nitrogen the
most spectacular of which was you'd put
a small amount of liquid nitrogen into a
sort of two liter or 1.25 liter soft
drink bottle
you know a big plastic thing just a
small amount into an empty one
and then you'd put it into a large
garbage bin of some sort
and the liquid nitrogen would of course
vaporize that it takes some time to do
so but in doing so it would also make
the plastic out of which the bottle was
made frozen solid crystalline
and the pressure would build from the
small amount of nitrogen increasing its
volume by you know a factor of 1800 or
something whatever
it is going from liquid to the gaseous
phase
and the bottle would blow up
spectacularly
I mean the explosion was massive
possibly a little bit dangerous that's
why you'd put it into this bin and the
bin would contain the explosion but it
would blow the lid off the top of the
bin and hugely uh noisy
and this would usually be the the
Capstone on the rest of the show it
would always surprised me about that was
the fact that
we had to go through all this training
and safety procedures and had to be very
careful in handling this stuff quite
right too because you get any on you and
it could you know freeze dry your skin
and if you put it in the wrong spot it's
going to vaporize and cause an explosion
all this sort of stuff things can go
wrong with liquid nitrogen it's a
dangerous substance it can be a
dangerous substance if mishandled
and yet on television you would
regularly see these TV chefs and so on
in the modern day be making ice cream
out of the liquid nitrogen in fact I can
walk around you know Sydney and find
these ice cream places where they're
just pouring the liquid nitrogen around
like no one's business no one seems to
care some people don't even have gloves
and it's like
why was I forced to go through all the
safety training you know as a science
person when the chef's over there don't
seem to care
different rules
um so anyway
I got to do these chemistry shows we got
to do electricity shows would make again
with the two liter bottles of like Coke
you'd turn these things into capacitors
by putting aluminum foil on the outside
and then you'd create these big Sparks
that was a dangerous show
we do that one we do all sorts of
chemistry shows but as fun as that stuff
was you know we'd do oscillation
reactions that was really cool where the
chemicals would
move between this bright pink color and
a transparent color bright pink
transparent bright pink transparent as
the solution went from acidic
back to neutral acidic back to neutral
and the color change was due to the
indicator
um indicating you know now it's acidic
and now it's not now acidic now it's not
now why does that happen because it's an
equilibrium reaction I won't go into the
chemistry of oscillation reactions right
now I could probably barely remember it
myself there was that there was the
clock reaction the clock reaction is
fantastic iodine clock reaction look
that one up on YouTube we would do that
and you'd have like four different
beakers of different concentrations of
this staff we have iodine
and the iodine would there be with
starch and various things and different
concentrations and you mix it together
and then after a certain time like 30
seconds the thing would go from
perfectly transparent to perfectly black
I mean black like the Coca-Cola here
like and just like that look it up on
YouTube fantastically spectacular kind
of reaction if you've never seen it
before and because they'd be at
different concentrations you know this
one would take 30 seconds and then it
would go and then once you got practice
that this you'd go all right as if
you're doing a magic trick because you'd
know after exactly 30 more seconds after
one minute the thing would go bang and
you could change you could alter the
um the concentration so that you need to
have you'd wait 30 seconds to go bang
black and the next one 35 bang bang bang
and you know you'd be pointing at these
things and they'd be changing color as
if you know by Magic
it's like that was fun to be able to do
that and to be able to explain what was
going on uh mixing cobalt chloride with
water you get a certain color cobalt
chloride and alcohol gives you a
different color and I took all of this
stuff of course and then went off and
became a science teacher where I could
use that and be kind of an Entertainer I
enjoyed being
up on stage
doing that kind of thing and explaining
that kind of thing and so simply because
I became practiced at it as I science
Communicator at University I realized
this is what I like doing I love doing
this I just love talking to people about
this I loved having people ask me
questions the Curiosity line up in
people's eyes and then the fascination
as you begin to explain it to them
especially the kids of course we would
be Associated my team for one or another
word at the Outreach Center for Sciences
part of the science faculty at New South
Wales University would be associated
with the School of Optometry it was also
part of the science faculty
and
kids from various schools would come in
to get free eye checks
and before they went in to see the
student optometrists we would have them
as like you know five and six and seven
and eight-year-olds and they'd sit there
and I would explain the basics of the
anatomy of the eye to them and how the
eyes worked and that would be so much
fun I realized I love doing this I love
talking to kids I love talking to people
of all ages about especially science and
then showing them stuff
and entertaining them I knew I was never
going to be an actor I knew I was never
going to be a stand-up comedian I knew
it was never going to be a politician
but I still wanted to do that thing be
in front of people and just talk to
people about not just anything but
science in particular
and so it was a seamless transition from
science Communicator at University which
is kind of a prestigious role to science
teacher far less prestigious
and but still enjoying it because as a
science teacher of course you've got the
same group of students it's a much much
much harder job I have to say is a
science teacher than science
communicator
because
and I apologize to the stand-up comedy
community but and
you know entertainers of all sorts
because as a science Communicator you
kind of are
it's easier
than being a teacher because
as a science communicator and all those
other entertainers you're doing the same
thing day after day after day it's the
same show
and so as a science Communicator we
would travel around from school to
school to school doing exactly the same
lesson exactly the same spectacular show
with liquid nitrogen and oscillation
reactions and clock reactions and
electricity and all this fun stuff and
all the kids would be excited and it's
like why can't our teachers be like this
you're so much fun and these experiments
are so exciting and you're so clear at
explaining all this stuff and it's like
I just do the same lesson day after day
after day traveling around to different
schools
and of course it's impressive because
I'm so practiced at this one lesson
and everything works because it's so
well rehearsed and I've got a different
audience every single day
the poor teachers have the same audience
day after day after day
they don't get to rehearse things quite
so well until you've been in the job for
like 10 15 years which I ended up being
and then you know after 15 iterations of
the same kind of thing and perhaps there
were sometimes you know especially in
mathematics you'd be teaching fractions
five times in a row from year seven
through to year 12. and so you get
practiced at that
but as a new teacher it can be extremely
difficult
not only the classroom management stuff
but just trying to be entertaining you
come in
full of enthusiasm that you're going to
be like the science communicator
which is what I was at University
thinking I'm just going to inspire all
the kids it's going to be fun every
single day new it is very hard to be
entertaining every single day even if
the material is changing every single
day because sometimes you've got to
think well if you're a good teacher
you've got to be across the stuff
in terms of physics and chemistry and
geology of course I knew all that I knew
basics of biology but then you'd get
into Niche areas of science sometimes
that I might not have covered and you
think I've got to teach this today I'm
not
exactly sure
it was very it was rare that that
happened okay because I was always a
science nerd so I was always just
fascinated by science but now and again
now and again something would come up
where you'd think oh
better bone up on this better read this
a little bit more carefully and the kids
would ask questions and of course I was
one of those people who was quite happy
to say I don't know the answer to that
there are some teachers who are
terrified of ever admitting ignorance
but I didn't mind anyway my point here
is without going off on a rant that it's
much harder to be a teacher
and entertaining and funny
and have spectacular demonstrations
as compared to the science communicator
although ostensibly you're doing kind of
the same thing the science Communicator
is doing the same lesson day after they
have to die very practiced at that that
can be entertaining at that it's like
doing stand-up comedy where you're just
doing the same routine all the time and
you can easily Riff Off the audience
okay because that's the rare exception
to the rule you're sticking to your
material otherwise the same as I suppose
a musician does you just can't become
very practiced at the same routine or an
actor you're becoming very practiced in
the theater all that kind of stuff a
teacher has a uniquely difficult role
because you have an audience there and
it's the same audience the same students
day after day after day that you are
supposed to be entertaining and
educating
and you've got different material every
single day as well it's not the same
material that you've practiced and
rehearsed unless you've been in the job
for a long time
this is why teaching is so hard
and so I know I give a lot of stick
and I'm hard on the education system
and some teachers are cruel and nasty
but overall the job is very difficult I
can only compare it to police being a
police officer
like that level of kind of difficulty
it's different
in terms of difficulty
um
but it's that kind of thing where you
have to continue to maintain the happy
Pleasant demeanor a lot of police don't
do that of course they're exactly the
opposite they come across mean but they
should be ideally they should be the
same as teachers they should be coming
across with a happy and pleasant
demeanor you're dealing with different
people all the time and no matter how
often you've encountered the same
situation you have to Summit how
find it within yourself to
treat this moment as unique and not
something that you've always done you've
dealt with many times before
which is why it is uniquely difficult I
would say teaching and police and I've
had some kind of dealings with both
okay
so that's how I became
and there's a tibolt words
[Music]
um
so good at communication
and explaining anything off the cuff
with great eloquence I don't know that I
agree with great eloquence I've seen
people who are truly great orators you
look at someone like Douglas Murray okay
fair enough he's not talking about
science but I mean that man under stress
has unflappable eloquence
oh I guess that's the other thing I love
debating at school and I became
proficient at that especially at
University as well
I loved getting into public debates
like Douglas Murray
so long as it was within my wheelhouse I
didn't like the artificial debates that
you would have at school school debating
where it would be this topic that you
weren't really interested in and you'd
have to take a side that you didn't
fully endorse so that was but that that
would still allow you to practice it's
all about practice it's like everything
else in the universe tibolt you know you
you want to be able to explain things
better you've just got to get out there
and do the thing
there's no point watching someone else
swimming
doing gymnastics doing physics
or communicating you have to do it
yourself
and then once you've done it yourself
for a while you realize
where the hazards are and all that kind
of thing
okay
I'm just taking a break with a a drink
for a moment
now
to bolt ask another question that's
taken me what 22 minutes to get through
one question so let me move a little
faster from here on in
we'll stick with two Bob
he said yes asked can you explain again
why morality is objective I've already
listened to podcast episode 109 I
understand knowledge in Morality help
solve
or not moral problems but can't those
problems be subjective if so wouldn't
that make morality subjective or not
Pierce actually don't think morality is
subjected but the explanation has not
clicked for me yet
um Okay so
my view on this is that
objectivity just means that
there's a truth of the matter out there
in the universe in some sense
the laws of physics are objective in
that
it's not a mere matter of opinion what
the laws of physics are
or even what our knowledge of the laws
of physics are
it's possible to be wrong
that's the fallible of stance and the
fallible stance is only possible given
the objectivity
of reality
it's not a mere matter of opinion that's
subjective
and the subjective also is about
how
well as someone has responded here and
as I often make this point as well
following Sam Harris following other
philosophers there's two senses of this
word
subjective and objective the distinction
here there's ontologically
objective and subjective
the ontological version is that there
are objects out there in the world
beyond your mind
whereas you are a subject experiencing
stuff there's the objects and then
there's the subject
so objective is stuff beyond your mind
subjective is stuff within your mind
that's the difference you are a subject
what you feel and experience is the
question of qualia and Consciousness
where your experience is subjectivity
then there is The epistemological Stance
where you say objective means it is
actually true out there in the world and
not a mere matter of opinion
the subjective sense there is mere
matter of opinion it's just your taste
the two are related
so why is morality objective what I say
increasingly on this point is that there
are
better and worse decisions to make in
order that we correct errors faster in
order to make progress better in order
to not slow the growth of knowledge
or cause a regression in our knowledge
as David Deutsch says
if there's going to be any fundamental
moral claim it is do not destroy the
means of error correction
so if you're heading in a direction
where you are slowing down the means of
error correction
or eliminating the means of error
correction
preventing errors from being corrected
that's objectively bad because it's
going to slow progress which is bad
because that's going to harm people so
it can come back to harm it can come
back to suffering but those things are
emergent
consequences of the deeper truth which
is an epistemological one about the
correction of errors
morality
in truth is about epistemology the
creation of knowledge
how we as individuals and as a society
can make progress and improve
objectively our circumstance
to make better widgets technology
progress in science
reduce suffering okay these things are
all elements of but none of them are
foundational in the same way that
correcting errors is foundation to allow
for all those other things to happen so
if you are destroying the means of error
correction that's bad and as a
consequence as a consequence that can
slow down technological progress
scientific progress and it can cause
suffering can cause suffering
but whether it causes suffering or not
is just a a consequence of this deeper
truth about error correction and error
correction is of course part of
epistemology and as we are beginning to
realize
epistemology the possibility of creating
knowledge the possibility
of correcting errors
is part of physics
so morality comes out of physics now of
course people hate this
but I'm not a reductionist I'm not
saying there has to be a deterministic
way to figure out what we should do in
any moment you can't look at the laws of
physics and that will tell you what to
do I'm saying the laws of physics can
constrain
what knowledge can be made
it just puts limits on things but it
doesn't tell you it tells you what's
possible but not what you should make
actual
in the moral Realm
that that's the way in which physics and
morality are linked
if you want to say you know all of
epistemology somehow reduces to physics
and all of morality somehow reduces to
epistemology
fine but it doesn't ever tell you none
of that moves none of those logical
moves ever tell you that they're
therefore is going to be some way of
referring to the laws of physics to tell
you what you should do next and that's
the question the central question of
morality
what should I do now what should I do
next
you've got this range of possibilities
what is the case at any moment is the
domain of science
what are the laws of physics what
happened yesterday what is going on
right now these are science questions
you might say well what is going on
right now that's journalism what
happened yesterday that's kind of
history in some sense
what are the laws of physics and biology
and chemistry
that
is science but all of these things are
matters of the physical sciences really
it's a matter of objectively what's
going on which is separate to morality
of all the things that could now happen
that the Transformations that we could
undertake using our wealth and our
knowledge and our resources which one
should we pursue that's morality
and there are better and worse moves to
make there there are better and worse
decisions to make within that space
that's why it's objective
and what is the criteria for better and
worse that's a whole other question and
we could do an entire podcast on that
I would say the things that allow for
the fastest progress to make things
better
we want people to stop dying we want
people to stop suffering
and we don't want to have to wait a
thousand more years for immortality we
want it tomorrow
we want to cure diseases cancer and
viruses tomorrow
so
speed makes a difference and anyone
arguing for authoritarianism to slow
things down
arguing for anti-democratic
institutions
all that kind of stuff
are doing a great disservice
to the world Humanity civilization and
morality there are objectively worse
moves to make
so that's why tibolt
morality is objective can problems be
subjective yes okay in in the sense that
all problems are subjective they are
parochial as popper and Deutsche say in
other words you have problems it's not
like there is a single problem for
everyone for all time
that would be a universal problem you
can have Universal Solutions
you know you've got this problem of
why the koalas look the way they do
that's a parochial problem but the
solution because of evolution by natural
selection is a universal truth about how
life evolves and diversifies
so although the
problems are parochial and subjective
the solutions may not be sometimes the
solutions will be you know what do you
want for dinner that's a subjective
problem with a subjective parochial
solution as well
you want to have
Indian food or Chinese food or just a
sandwich whatever that's just for you
that's not a universal solution but in
science you can get Universal Solutions
okay
hopefully that helps to Bob
Peter Stromberg
AKA Pez Papa Pear at Papa Pez on Twitter
has asked if you are familiar with the
Ludwig von mises philosophy of science
and praxology
in general how do you think it relates
to papyrian philosophy of science and
epistemology are they compatible
yes I'm familiar with mises
um
and the Austrian School of Economics
more broadly
I know that
amazes and and Rand knew each other
I don't know a lot of details
because it's kind of like to me
economics is kind of like chemistry
in that
it's cool
it's true it helps it solves a whole
bunch of problems once you understand
the basics which I think is most
important then you get how it can't
possibly conflict with physics and
epistemology
there are no contradictions in reality
and in our deep explanations
insofar as there are contradictions
they can be resolved
there aren't that many contradictions
between
organic chemistry if there are any an
inorganic chemistry and fundamental
physics
it wouldn't make sense to say hey here's
this reaction in chemistry that defies
the laws of physics if that happens
you've got a problem
and you'd probably say well you're
making a mistake when it comes to
understanding what's going on with this
organic chemistry reaction
the laws of physics dominate
it's not that
you've just proved wrong quantum theory
with your little reaction going on there
in the beaker there's something wrong
with what's going on in the beaker you
haven't interpreted things correctly
in the same way in the same way
if your economic theory is immoral leads
to suffering leads to as we were talking
about before
slowing the growth of knowledge
destroying the means of error correction
then your economic theory is wrong
objectively wrong
so are they compatible well mazes was
talking about human behavior and
basically economics economic theories
so of course it has to be compatible
with properian philosophy
and epistemology more broadly and
science
these things have to cohere they're just
about reality about how to make progress
but in the same way that me personally
you know I got to second year chemistry
I love coming I was better at chemistry
in high school than I was at physics
I don't know why but I was just I loved
the mole concept when I first
encountered it and like you know 14 15
years of age and I thought this is so
cool God this is so powerful being able
to figure out the mass of the products
given the mass of the reactants
and this chemical formula would allow
you to predict exactly how much hydrogen
gas was going to be lost during this
reaction of the acid and the metal it
was so cool you could do these
calculations and the volume of the gas
that would be produced and how the
temperature would change all this stuff
so basic chemistry was just so exciting
for me I went for University I did more
of it and I thought it's cool now we're
getting into quantum theory of chemistry
and even in high school
I already had the sense that oh there's
this whole other thing carbon chemistry
organic chemistry
and it was harder but it was cool like
esterification if you ever done any of
those reactions could produce these
beautiful Aromas
like the fake smell of apple and banana
and all this kind of stuff in fact it's
not so much fake because the reason
bananas smell the way they do is due to
Estes natural Esters of course
but when you
distill out
uh the particular kind of Esther
Ethel B Tannerite I can't remember the
names of these things but anyway there
are these these Esters that you can
create in the lab that smell for all the
world like banana or smell for all the
world like apple they have this kind of
artificial quality because you're only
producing just the one chemical whereas
of course real bananas smell the way
they do because of a combination of
chemicals
but the reason why you can have those
lollies or candies that smell like
banana is because you can produce
artificially these
this fake chemical stuff Fiesta
and it's complicated
you have to do it under reflux
but
I knew I liked physical chemistry I knew
I liked the inorganic stuff once I got
into the organic stuff like a
certification become more complicated
and you have to remember all these
reactions and then once I got to first
year uni it was getting harder the
organic especially you know organic I
still like because it was just clean
it wasn't a thousand and one different
reactions
second year I just gave up on organic
chemistry altogether but it's just too
much it's too complicated
and it wasn't what I was interested in
it was becoming more and more emergent
for every
inorganic chemical reaction the
industrial chemical processes
the mining users
to create
you know Steel
and all the fun stuff that I really
liked acids
and bases
for all of those there are like a
hundred
different organic
reactions
it's so much more complicated complex
difficult
but you know that's how you make
Plastics and it all comes out of carbon
this one element is just so much more
rich in terms of the number of reactions
the organic chemists and what they can
do and how powerful that entire field is
how complex it is and it leads to
biochemistry of course that comes out of
that this is why medicine it can be so
difficult because you're dealing with
just this vast number of organic
chemical reactions I prefer the
inorganic stuff the Hard Solid metals
and acids and bases and that kind of
thing
what's that got to do with this well in
the same way that
I get bored with the organic chemistry
but I understand the value of it I can
look at it and go this is fascinating
absolutely fascinating
but I just can't be bothered
economics evokes the same feeling Within
Me I know that there can be no
contradictions between organic chemistry
and what I'm truly interested in which
is like physics and epistemology
I know that there can't be any
contradictions between the fine details
of economics
and physics and epistemology
and so therefore
um
there can they have to be compatible
nieces
praxology
rand's understanding of economics
the fine details you know Thomas Souls
work here
ignore all the Socialist stuff and you
know how Central Banking should work and
that kind of thing that nonsense put
that aside okay
people drawing graphs of
the effect of interest rates on things
okay
true but anytime you have the government
intervening in things it just ruins
everything
and so that that seems to me to be a a
basic fact about economics
and then everything else just flows as a
matter of logic
it's kind of like organic chemistry in
that sense it's like
oh
carbon has a valency of four it can make
these bonds with itself and chains and
loops and can bond with other things to
make alkanes alkenes alkynes and then
DNA and it just gets more complicated
but it's all just a logical consequence
of this simple fact
that carbon can bond with itself
and then you have you end up with this
huge field
that logically falls out of
carbon chemistry
this entire thing organic chemistry
falls out of that but although I think
it's fascinating and amazing I
personally am not so interested in it
um
so
yeah that that that's what I think about
economics and mises I think it's
brilliant and I admire the people who
are really into this stuff you're on
Brook on Rand needs us the austrians
but I just can't get into it
it's like medicine right it's the same
sort of thing
I admire the people who do it
they can't be a contradiction at the
heart of what medicine says and what
physics is about reality
but I personally can't
find it gripping I just admire the
people who do it so that's what I think
about yeah this
is properian philosophy and Jesus
praxology are they compatible absolutely
they must be
whatever the truths are about economics
and finance they have to be compatible
with the truths of
physics and insofar as there is a
disagreement well that's just a problem
we have to resolve it
yeah
let's keep going
uh people often ask me this campaigners
has asked me this as well is there
anywhere you substantially disagree with
Deutsch
I would say I don't know
um
not that I'm aware of I'd love to find
out if I could you know but this is the
reason I
I've fallen in love with his work
the books is papers because I can't find
anything to disagree with I wish I could
but I can't
my avoiding the answering of the
question often comes down to I know that
David likes
T and so do I we even agree on that t is
the king of drinks
that said David doesn't seem to mind
tea bags I prefer the loose leaf so
there we go it's a maybe a fundamental
disagreement
I
if I have a choice I'll have the loose
leaf tea
every time
and only under desperate circumstances
when I'm visiting the home of someone
who doesn't have loose leaf tea will I
have tea bags
that could be a fundamental disagreement
otherwise no I can't find anything and
when I do think that I've found a
disagreement with Deutsch
like for constructive theory what what
happens is that I realize myself I
better read more into this I better try
and understand what David's saying and
of course that's the way in which I
resolve things and that often happens
right I think I disagree with popper on
there so I disagree with Rand on this
but then I read more about what they're
saying and then I go ah I get what
they're saying now
it wasn't that I disagreed
I didn't understand but that could also
be where disagreements all come from
people not understanding one another
okay
let's keep going
um
Benjamin frilick you have said that pure
reductionism and the resulting claim
that a laplace's demon is possible at
least in theory are akin to invoking the
supernatural
does everettian quantum mechanics
however allow for such a demon by
allowing him to predict probabilities of
all outcomes no
[Laughter]
for one thing
probabilities are not fundamental in the
everettian picture
so
no that
there's nothing
there's no way of being able to predict
what's going to happen moment to moment
even if you had a supercomputer that was
able to analyze the Motions of
all particles
now I've made this point before
is what laplace's demon would require
right you know being able to see the
trajectories of the particles and allow
this one to go through the window and
stopping this one and so as you see this
particle with high velocity traveling
this way then you let it go through but
this one's going slow and so you stop it
and you keep opening the window and
closing the little Gap or whatever it
happens to be
and therefore you can separate out the
high energy from the low energy just by
looking at stuff but of course the
problem is that
you actually by looking you're actually
interacting it's the first thing
looking it's not a passive process
looking means
absorbing photons at the very least
that's a physical process so observation
of the physical process
there's that that we can say
but also
there's no possible way of being able to
look and see all particles
that are going to be
coming to bear on any given situation as
I like to say even if you could have
this
this Supernatural Oracle of some kind
that would be able to detect the motion
of all these particles
in some region of space there's always
going to be a region of space outside of
that from which the cosmic ray comes
crashing into your field of view
and upsetting all of your carefully
detected measurements of everything
inside of the bubble
you might say but just make the bubble
bigger to take into account the entirety
of the universe okay so then you're God
then you are literally Supernatural
you're going to be Supernatural anyway
for whatever region of space so if
you're able to see and detect
every single particle in the entire
universe
and then react to it instantly
you're God
and so this is why I say laplace's demon
isn't possible
all these kind of ways of uh predicting
the probabilities of all outcomes uh
equivalent to the supernatural
together
there's been a few questions about
problems Andrew gleeve has asked about
is the concept of a problem reducible to
construct a theoretic terms
and can they be regarded as
counterfactuals
end quote
um this is a great question that I might
ask Kiara I'm going to be speaking to
Chiara maleta
over the coming weeks
hopefully
in particular for episode 200 of top
cast which is approaching swiftly I
think I'm at 197 or 198 now so not long
and I want that to be a conversation
with Chiara
this will be a great question for her
my own opinion is
um
as I said before problems are
parochial in other words
individuals have problems perhaps a
large group of people have problems
perhaps in its high civilization could
have problems but
there can be no problem for everyone at
all times everywhere
unlike with Solutions
so
can we express a problem in constructive
theoretic terms and can they be regarded
as counter factuals yeah so
I I guess so
kind of factual terms you know what
might have been the case what could be
the case what should be the case
all of these things are cannofactuals
ways of expressing what
might possibly have occurred
the kind of factual world this is what
happens this is what could have happened
is what possibly might have happened and
so on
problems are certainly well within that
the remit of that way of phrasing things
yes
but this is a question for Kiara
next question uh interesting things you
should know about has asked that's the
name of his Twitter account how do you
increase trust in a society end quote I
would say wrong question bad question
we don't want to increase trust in a
society I think trust is a bad metric
I don't think one we should trust
people in general
what we want to do is have an active
explanation of why people are doing what
they're doing
what we want in a society is not trust
but better ways of detecting and then
correcting errors
you might say oh that's a horrible way
to think about things shouldn't you
trust your partner or your mother or
your girlfriend or your sister and Etc
no
and I think trust is the right word you
should have an active explanation of why
your relatives your friends
love you and why you love them
and that has nothing to do with trust
but you understand why you should treat
them well and why they should treat you
well
you can call that trust if you like but
I prefer to regard that as having an
active Theory it's not faith and trust
which you just emotions but an objective
understanding and knowledge of the other
person
the knowledge of yourself and it should
work both ways
so it's not trust
okay
Paul has asked are you living as though
you were mortal or Immortal I don't
think about that that's his question
uh
I I it's not something that directs my
moment-to-moment experience of the world
I
I live
I live as if
I'm not going to die in the next moment
I make decisions as if
I'm going to be here next week next year
now do you call that being Immortal
because that will always be true I don't
know ask me again when I'm 95.
maybe I'll still think I'm going to be
here tomorrow I'm going to be here next
week I'll still be making decisions like
that maybe we all do that I can't
imagine what it would be like thinking
I'm going to die tomorrow perhaps I will
have that experience one day I know a
lot of people unfortunately are told by
doctors and so on you've got a week
you've got a month you've got a year
left
so they're living as though not only
that they are mortal but they have a
they they know how much longer they've
got left
so at the moment I guess I'm somewhere
in between I'm living
not exactly as if I'm Immortal but not
like I know when I'm going to die either
okay and a cat
great supporter of mine uh
uh well worth following on Twitter
uh aniket vartak
has asked
quote you are were question mark
a science instructor therefore want to
ask how can one incorporate properian
epistemology to do a project about
experimental design
assigned to a middle schooler I have
some ideas but would love to get your
perspective thanks
okay
aniket
now
pulp hearing epistemology is
the possibility of being wrong of being
fallible of correcting errors all that
kind of stuff
so
experimental design
goodness
what I would say is if you want to
succeed at school
you've got to do what the teacher says
the teacher might be against
epistemology they might not understand
it all that kind of stuff
not picking myself up but I would hope
to have thought that when I was an
instructor as you say at school
a science instructor a science teacher
I had an active philosophy about how to
treat students that treated them
as
agents people
regular human beings
and I was fallible as they were fallible
and so I wasn't biased I hope
whether or not they were coming at me
with
vidconcinian ideas Marxist ideas
preparing ideas whatever it happened to
be
okay
especially when it came to
marking or grading work
I hope I always urge on the side of
awarding
grades and marks
based upon
not the student being correct
for some definition of correct
but rather on things like
passion curiosity and effort
in order to
hopefully Foster within them
excitement about the world and learning
and all that kind of thing that was the
last thing I wanted to do was to turn
someone off learning but so often
teachers do it precisely that in their
feedback
so that said
you have to keep in mind who you're
dealing with when it comes to teachers
is this project going to be marked
what's your aim as a student
presumably if you're helping someone
who's a kid if you yourself were killer
now enough you've got a child
they want to do well
and so that that can mean literally
asking the teacher what do you want from
me
these days of course you have this
assessment criteria
the schools and teachers give you it's
like here's how you get the good marks
now it's the kid want to get good marks
some kids don't they don't care
that's great
fine that's a rare student but you know
you can you do in Canada this and it's
like I'm just going to tell you I'm just
gonna
I was I was often the kid who wanted to
do well wanted to get the marks I didn't
care about the truth of the situation I
wanted to know what does the teacher
want and I'll do that thing
[Laughter]
I was a good little boy
from that perspective
but there are some kids out there who
don't they don't care about that they're
just going to write stuff and I admire
that
so
what does this middle schooler as you
say want to achieve
do they want to get high marks in which
case ask the teacher or look at the the
criteria
or are they more interested in producing
quality unique work that may or may not
impress the teacher
and then how do you incorporate
preparing epistemology into that I would
say with a focus on errors
a focus on errors what the errors are
with with science
experimental design
in physics in chemistry the physical
sciences
what you want is the capacity to
quantify your errors it's Deutsche says
somewhere other words the effect and I
asked David would possibly not be happy
with this because I was you know he I I
think he he doesn't like it makes him
feel icky and I understand that impulse
if his work is brought into the
classroom but I did you know make
exceptions sometimes
and someone in the beginning of infinity
he says something to the effect of
a result quoted without uncertainty or
without error is strictly meaningless
and I would write that up when I was
teaching experimental design that's
precisely the kind of thing I would
teach my students I would want them to
learn especially in physics
you can't just quote the result you
can't just say what the length of the
thing is that you're measuring or the
mass of the
the chemical is you need to tell me what
the uncertainty of the measuring devices
it's five centimeters long okay is that
five plus or minus one centimeter plus
or minus 0.5 centimeters
is the mass
3.2 grams or is it 3.20 plus or minus
0.01 grams I want to know the
uncertainty
what are the error bars
that's Papillion
tell me about the sources of error
both systematic which is problems with
the methodology that are possible and
random which is this thing about error
bars and the
how good your measuring instrument is so
there are all these sources of
uncertainty
to the credit of schools and
universities now they do incorporate
this a lot but not always
so that would be my
Focus if I wanted to incorporate popular
epistemology to some extent to talk
about all the ways in which this thing
could be wrong
okay it's not only papyrian it's not
only papyrian but to say I could have
made a mistake here this experimental
design could be completely wrong that
could be a source systematic error
all of this stuff about
what I've measured could be a result of
a mistake with the measuring instrument
my ruler
Etc
that's properian here's all the errors
so that would be what I would say
just keep going
um
wow how long have we been going for an
hour goodness
um okay we'll see how we can go and
maybe I can do another one tomorrow or
the next day
um so I feel like I'm not going to get
through everything
I'll move more quickly
Benjamin has asked
hi Brett can you explain how Einstein's
block universe is still compatible with
the emerging property of human Free Will
and creativity if humans can change the
future how is that compatible with the
block Universe thanks end quote good
question Benjamin
foreign
so
I endorse the concept of free will
I think it's just another way of talking
about the reality of choice
there's nothing Supernatural about free
will it's about the creation of
knowledge
it's another way of expressing this
weird mystery that is
what the heck are people doing why is it
that stuff appears to arise in the
universe it's television that's in the
background how is that part of the laws
of physics
well explanations are required in terms
of physics and chemistry and Science in
order for people to come up with the
design of something like that
in a similar way not exactly
an analogous way to
how the heck did cats arise or bugs or
trees whatever your life form is oh
that's evolution by natural selection
are koalas and kangaroos somehow
embedded in the laws of physics the Big
Bang
I guess
but you can't predict
given the laws of physics that this is
what will arise after all the laws of
physics allow for everything that's
possible to arise and they do somewhere
in the universe the block Universe idea
is
that everything is predetermined
just a rising for the laws of physics
that you could somehow
take everything that exists in physical
reality from the moment of the Big Bang
through to the end of time and if you
have a God's eye view you just see it
all laid out there
whatever it brings into this picture is
that all the physical physically
possible possibilities are there
represented in space in some way shape
or form what I would say Deutsch adds to
this on top of that
one of the great advances David Deutsch
is that
information flow knowledge creation
is the thing that
leads to the biggest structures in the
Multiverse
in other words
if you had this God's eye view and
you're looking down on this block
universe
you don't just see all the possibilities
there like every possibility
exists in equal measure but rather some
things happen more often
those things that
especially are caused by explanatory
knowledge
huge structures when you look
as God down on the Multiverse you would
see things like aha satellites are a
thing
all these civilizations have figured out
artificial satellites and they're using
them that appears again and again and
again across the Multiverse
or boats or aircraft technology medicine
all these things just keep on appearing
in the Multiverse
this information with causal power
this thing that is causing its own
replication again and again
explanatory knowledge
none of it is predictable at the Big
Bang because it's all happening and you
can't tell what thing is going to happen
more often than this other thing what
thing is going to get copied and be more
useful because that depends upon choices
and preferences of people yes somehow
it's there at the beginning of time but
none of it can be predicted because so
much of it is created it's compatible as
Benjamin has said here with the emergent
properties of Free Will Einstein's block
universe and creativity because it must
be it must be these things cannot
contradict
you can have it must be possible for
deterministic laws of physics to be
compatible with creativity because they
both exist
that's it
the laws of physics determine what's
going to happen what's going to happen
next what's the terminal laws of physics
does that mean you can predict what's
going to happen next no because
determined does not mean predictable
they're separate things
determined can mean in 50 of the
Universe X happens and 50 of the
universes not X happens but you can't
tell right now which of those universes
you're going to be in because it could
be due to
a Quantum fluctuation on the one hand or
people's choices on the other and you
can't know now which one you're going to
be in
a moment from now
so yeah that's that's why Benjamin
Vish at falling into film has asked
there is Hardware software universality
what are some interesting outcomes of
having one but not the other ah well you
could have Hardware universality without
software universality universality but
it's not possible to have software
universality without Hardware
universality
because after all
if you've only got software universality
on what is it running if you don't have
Hardware universality a special purpose
computer
no computer
if it's a special purpose computer that
isn't Universal how can it possibly
allow for an infinite or Universal
repertoire
of
software outcomes what can't
so the precondition for software
universality is first half Hardware
universality
can you have Hardware universality
without the software yes sure of course
that's the overwhelming majority of
computers that we know of
don't have software universality we do
we people have this software
universality in other words we can
emulate the behavior of any other
bit of software we can do what any other
bit of software does
what any other physical system does
by choosing
and we can do that thing to arbitrary
accuracy but not perfect accuracy in
particular we will decide to do
something else after a while so we're
not
uh although we're Universal explainers
we can't be Universal Constructors
Universal Constructor among other things
as Hardware anyway
let's not get into that
the point is that
Your Capacity to explain anything that's
out there depends upon
the hardware that you're running on
having also this capacity to do anything
but the hardware that can do anything
may not do anything because
it might not be programmed to do just
anything it might be programmed to do a
specific thing which is what the
majority of
computers alike they'll do one thing
they do one thing exceedingly well even
though they could do a whole bunch of
other things
I will be back in let's call it uh two
minutes while I go and get myself some
water
bear with me
foreign
apologies I have returned
okay where are we up to ah universality
okay so we've done that
let's keep on going
Braden Jenkins fast
from where did you derive your
optimistic view on the nuclear defensive
capabilities of the US it seems to
contradict the mainstream consensus end
quote
uh
uh I didn't drive it that's the first
thing
I never derive anything I
guessed it
given what I would regard as good
explanations about
Enlightenment Traditions technology
the work of popper and Deutsch
so that's where it comes from
uh
yeah it contradicts the mainstream
consensus but then
so does everything in the work
almost of Carl popper and David Deutsch
and hence what I say about many topics
um so this is for anyone who's
interested a recent piece called the
mother military
that I produced I recommend that to
people just have a look on
you know my YouTube channel
and you'll see it there and basically I
say there that
the Trope of mutually assured
destruction is a terrible lie it's a
falsehood
and
the US in particular NATO more generally
for want of another word phrase would
wipe the floor with anyone who attacked
them
kind of recently saw after I produced
that piece this wonderful speech by
President Barack Obama
talking about how
um the US is the most powerful military
in the world and it's not even close
they spend more money on their military
than the next six nations combined
and he said this in Congress to Rapture
us Applause rightfully so
and it's exactly the point that I was
making you know there is no
there is no competition here the US is
the most powerful and if you take into
account the other NATO Nations
the UK the majority of Europe
uh even non-nato Nations that are Allied
Australia
yeah
Japan are they part of NATO South Korea
or whatever Israel
the overwhelming
capacity of those militaries
and nuclear capabilities there is no
comparison between them and what Russia
Russia's asking for help from North
Korea I think it's hilarious
I mean if you're asking help from North
Korea
oh
that was just it's hilarious I mean it's
dangerous as well I get that but I mean
Germany in
you know 1939 was a world superpower
genuinely they were a genuine threat to
the rest of the world as was Japan but
now the best we have is China
with dodgy
military capabilities Russia who's
asking for help from North Korea I mean
they're nothing like the technological
Powerhouse that Germany was in the 1930s
yeah
Germany actually innovated back then
China's not Russia's not the best they
can do is steal
and counterfeit technology from the US
and not even that well
cheap plastic rubbish
do they have nuclear weapons sure but as
I said in that piece
the mother military
if
China or Russia dared to launch nuclear
weapons against
any Ally of the United States the Reign
of Fire that would come down on them
would be so final and complete after the
launching of just one nuclear weapon all
of their nuclear capabilities in Russia
and China will be destroyed
very very quickly in short order
their leaders would be wiped out the
militaries would be destroyed and their
capacity to fire another nuclear weapon
after the first one got off
would be destroyed
the people in the mainstream consensus
as you say that talk about mutually
assured destruction and fear about
Russia and China
are enemies of the West there's a lot of
them in the west that's unfortunate but
that's the truth
okay
so where did I derive it from just an
understanding I would say of
the capacity
for
nations in the enlightenment tradition
to quickly correct errors to make
progress faster
and to always
have technology which is a step ahead of
stat the Nations that tend in the
direction of static societies like China
and Russia not to mention North Korea of
course
so yeah
I'm afraid if that's the right word of
China making ridiculous errors and
hurting their own people I'm Not Afraid
as an Australian citizen that China is
going to invade it's on where I mean the
slightest there's no chance they can try
they could try all day long
and that would cause
damage and hurt to the Australian people
sure
but they'd cause far more hurt
themselves and I I think in short order
their own people would give up let's say
you know the worst happened
Xi Jinping decided let's invade
Australia
how long would that last
give it a month maybe at worst
his own people would probably take over
okay they'd overthrow him that would
happen pretty quickly
but
the Navy would be stopped their Air
Force would be stopped their army would
be stopped
by the US and NATO and Britain
and Australia
and their own paper would give up
they would lay down their arms because
hey the Chinese are fighting to get out
of their own country rather a lot
they're coming to Australia and America
and Europe
people aren't fighting to get into China
they're fighting to get out not talk
about China because they are the most
powerful
Nation that's not part of NATO in the
West
but I'm not worried about them so that's
where
the optimistic view of
the nuclear offensive capabilities of
the US comes from
a simple understanding of
who is more powerful and by a long shot
um
I I've just realized I'm going through
Twitter stuff but I need to
um
go back to my patreons
okay Derek Bert from patreon has asked
me quote
I'm curious as to your thoughts of why
the papyrian Deutsche explanation of how
to acquire knowledge conjecture
refutation explanation has not been more
formalized into a method formalized in
scare quotes method into scare quotes
like the scientific method or lean Sigma
I have lots of thoughts of how this
approach could be a form process in my
work life as myself my team and my
company build knowledge on how to
compete and win in the market I figured
I would have heard it first from a
Management Consultant or book than from
Naval and Deutsche okay
thank you Derek thank you for being a
patreon
Papa wrote a book called the logic of
scientific discovery
it's his first book first major work and
basically the
aside from all the other points he makes
is that there is no such logic there is
no recipe you can follow in order to
discover
scientific truth or scientific knowledge
or anything like that
so there's no recipe
there's no way of formalizing things
into a method
that's the first thing
now
the fact that you can't formalize these
things is not a problem
happily because it means that
conjecturing and refuting is always a
creative process you can't formalize
creativity
if you could
then you'd have an AGI
so maybe one day we can figure it out
but even then you're not going to be
able to predict the outcome or the
output of the AGI program that's the
whole point of a creative program
this lean Sigma thing is something to do
with
I believe
uh management talk stuff
and and
you know these are heuristics it's like
you say
why hasn't acquiring knowledge and
explanations being formalized into a
method like the scientific method well
Papa's point is there is no such
scientific method
there is no method you can follow yeah
sure schools and universities talk about
the scientific method scare quotes
but there is no thing you can follow
there's no way of
setting up the world into this is the
aim of your experiment collect your
materials together here's the method you
follow for this particular experiment
and at the end you will get results and
a conclusion reliably it's just not the
way any of this works real science comes
down to problems conflicts between ideas
foreign
that process is not something that can
be formalized because
formalizing means that you have
a predictable way of producing an
outcome but you don't know what the
problem is that you're going to
encounter tomorrow
and for that reason because you know
what the problem is you're going to
encounter tomorrow you can't possibly
formalize ways of solving the problem
yet to be encountered tomorrow
so yeah unfortunately you might be
disappointed by that but I am thrilled
by the fact that hey you'll never have a
fixed recipe
you'll always have open-ended questions
as for building knowledge on how to
compete and win in the market
um well that's all very good
but I would just say you want to allow
your team and yourself
freedom
to explore options
non-coercive ways of managing your team
I'm not a CEO I'm not a manager anything
like that but I can tell you as having
been part of teams over the years
that I could tell
what made a successful manager and team
and it was those managers who weren't
coercive and those teams who are allowed
the freedom and liberty to explore the
creative space for one of another phrase
so when things weren't formalized the
more formalized things became the more
coercive things became this happened a
lot in teaching and education where you
know the Socialists would take control
and when the Socialists take control the
authoritarians you know teaching is of
course education is of course
authoritarian to the call
but the more authoritarian it became the
worse it became the worse the outcomes
for everyone teachers and students
marxists love
formalizing stuff
writing down this is what you need to do
this is what you need to learn and this
is how we're going to assess things and
blah blah blah blah blah blah
the perfect antidote to creativity and
solution finding and problem solving
so if you want to compete and win don't
do that don't search for ways of
formalizing stuff instead do the
opposite allow for creativity
don't have standard operating procedures
[Laughter]
now I'm going to get upset people who
are in the military because of course I
do want but standard operating
procedures work in certain circumstances
but if you adhere to them and Jocko
willink will talk about this yeah it's
important to have
here's the typical way we do things but
but
you can't be too formal about these
things you need elasticity you need the
capacity to drop the plan at any moment
and say
what we've just encountered is a problem
hitherto no one has ever faced before
and so our recipe our standard operating
procedure cannot possibly work in this
situation because it's a problem no
one's encountered before
so how could the standard way of doing
things ever lead to a good outcome given
this particular input
is not something we've ever had before
and so therefore the process leading to
good output
can't possibly work in this case
it's a different thing
so that's what I would say
um
be very wary of anyone coming to you
with ideas about how to formalize stuff
is the problem with you mentioned their
management Consultants they want to
put into a nice neat little box the
world
whether it's business or anything else
they want to be able to say
here are the problems and here's how you
solve them but that's not the way it
works
um
a problem isn't a problem if you've
already got a recipe for finding the
solution that's not a problem that's
just here's a situation
here's your little black box and out the
end of the Black Box you get the
solution but it was never a problem in
the first place because hey here's just
what's done a problem is
where you've got a conflict in your
ideas you don't know what the outcome is
going to be
that's what a genuine problem is
the Black Box way of solving things
won't work
okay
I played the point let's keep on going
oh um Alexander has asked what is the
exact difference
always worries me exact
ly
what is the exact difference between
Deutsch explanation and the principle of
sufficient reason they seem like the
same thing so the principle is
sufficient reason uh is so I'm just
looking this up
think back to my university philosophy
but he wasn't the only one who talked
about it
um
but yeah leibnitz talked about how
everything's got to have a cause
everything's got to have a reason
I don't know about that
because
deutsche's point is
we can always invent new modes of
explanation
so maybe some things don't have a cause
in the way that you would normally think
about it so principle of sufficient
reason is too narrow a way of thinking
about how the universe works
thinking in terms of causes
or reasons
can be misleading
it's a subset of
uh what we might say is the broader
the fact that
everything
should have an explanation ultimately
things must be explicable things just
don't happen randomly
which is the misconception that
certain ideas about Quantum Theory
brought us but now that we know
We Know Better
everything has a has an explanation
behind it now whether you call this a
cause is another matter but I think the
word cause can be misleading
so it should be the Principal
of good explanations
you may not know what the explanation is
yet
but
searching hard enough long enough hard
enough you may adjust with some
creativity find the good explanation
so what's the difference between
Deutsche explanation the principles
sufficient reason I would say
this idea of Deutsche explanation or
hard to vary explanations good
explanations is a very broad category
that captures everything within reason
but the principle is sufficient reason
is more about not so much reasons but
about causes which is a more narrow
subset of what George is talking about
let's keep going
tadas has asked can our universe exist
forever what about the claims about heat
death what's your take
so
heat death is this idea that well
at the beginning of the universe or the
Big Bang there was a certain amount of
energy there and as time goes on and as
the universe expands which is happening
and it's accelerating in its expansion
which is the best explanation we have at
the moment
then the amount of energy that was there
in the Big Bang is being spread over a
greater and greater volume of space
and as that happens the temperature of
the entire Universe goes down it's
decreasing constantly
and so the available energy to do work
with
in other words useful stuff
available energy decreases
asymptotically to zero this is the heat
death
the temperature of the universe is just
declining declining declining
on average
everywhere it's now 2.7 Kelvin 2.7
degrees Celsius above absolute zero so
it's getting lower and lower and lower
all the time
so the amount of useful energy there is
decreasing
okay
that's our present understanding of
cosmology and the way things work
but that's just a present understanding
as David Deutsch likes to point out
you know our theories of cosmology are
changing on the order of decades the
universe
our present understanding
has existed for billions of years and
will exist for trillions of years more
we've got a long time to change our
theories
so yeah I'm not too concerned about the
heat death of the universe it's a long
way off if it's going to happen
and we human beings May on the one hand
discover new theories that refute this
idea of heat death
and on the other even if heat death is a
possibility
we might be able to take advantage of
hitherto unknown sources of energy like
this idea of dark energy maybe we can
harness dark energy or Zero Point Energy
various other forms of energy
people are yet to discover or have
already discovered but being able to
utilize them in ways that counteract
this heat death
that's my take
dmn is has asked is meditation an
illusion
I don't know what that question means
everything could be an error everything
is error prone
we could be making mistakes
when it comes to our own existence
even that yes even that even I think
therefore I am could be wrong
and in the same way
uh anything about our subjective
experience the world which includes
meditation and the contents thereof
could also be an illusion so is
meditation an illusion I don't know
could it be yes anything could be an
illusion
um
yasu has asked and I apologize yasu
because I haven't listened to the chit
chit is air chat's version of tweet
everyone should be on air chat if you
want to talk to me about stuff
an even better way than doing it by this
method is air chat get airchat.com and
we can talk I'm talking to people on
there all the time someone's already
asked a question about that uh tibolt
asked the first question I answered was
all about this you know apparently I
speak well in nature I'm there every day
come and talk to me on air chat
a-i-r-c-h-a-t airchat get that
um
and yeah the equivalent of tweets
on air chat is called a chit c-h-i-t and
yasu has asked I asked you something
here in the quoted chit you were talking
about creating something is bringing
something in this world which already
wasn't present in any form now I haven't
listened to the
to the chit and I don't think I can here
and now he's just taken a screenshot and
so yeah so I apologize I don't know
exactly what the question was
but
I can guess
because I do talk about this a lot the
creation
to be creation
can't have antecedents in the world
you can't derive it from something
that's already there
in the same way the universe was created
from nothing
I argue ideas
just like species weren't there can't be
derived from the species that were
already there
and the ideas can be derived from the
ideas that were already there
sure
once you've got life then the life
evolves
but you can't predict that a kangaroo
will evolve from a bacteria lots of
things evolve from bacteria from
dinosaurs through to human beings
kangaroos
bugs and grubs
in the same way you can't derive any of
those particular life forms given
bacteria after all some of them or none
of them may have arisen
ideas that we have now like general
relativity can't possibly have been
predicted from
euclidean geometry
or basic arithmetic or the grunts and
noises that neanderthals used to make
so
genuine Creations weren't present in any
form any
even though there was antecedents in the
world
by which I mean
hey at the Big Bang
energy was created and then Mata
crystallized out of that energy
but yeah that existed that matter
existed those atoms existed that
hydrogen existed but that doesn't tell
you
that given that matter given that
hydrogen
that you can predict hey the Statue of
Liberty which is made of matter
is going to exist one day
at you know 13.6 billion years ago
you know
a hundred thousand years after the big
bang you've got
hydrogen gas
but there's nothing about looking at
that hydrogen gas and looking at the
laws of physics back then that would
tell you ah there's going to be this
place called the United States and
they're in the part of the United States
called New York there's going to be this
thing called the Statue of Liberty
no
that Statue of Liberty wasn't there in
any form at the Big Bang or soon after
the big bang even though there was
matter there and energy there
in the same way
our knowledge now wasn't there
13.6 billion years ago either
okay Tim has asked for me to roast this
please
let me see if I can do this so here's
the thing he's asking me
to roast
all right
let me um
let me come back
to that oops
um
grab a hold of that if I can
now I've messed myself up because I
can't
uh
wow okay
Deutsch primer from Tim so Tim's made
this I should be kind about this it's
going to I was going to roasted Tim but
I won't because you've made this you've
gone to some effort to do this so
I'm gonna have to think about this Faron
um
give me a second
I will return
foreign
so I should have looked at this
before I
um sat down to do this shouldn't I him
um
so let me let me have a look
the Deutsch primer
so we've got
the intersection of The Theory of
Everything a Multiverse Theory
you're saying is computations area the
the intersection between the theory of
everything and Constructor theory is
quantum physics
I don't know about your Venn diagram Tim
unfortunately
like you're even saying there that the
intersection between Multiverse Theory
and Constructor Theory
you have AGI there but I
I don't even know do you need Multiverse
theory for AGI I don't think so I don't
think so
I could roast this in many ways
unfortunately
I don't know man
um yeah
I'd made a while to actually think about
it
like you're even saying here Multiverse
Theory and the theory of knowledge the
intersection there is epistemology but
to me there's absolutely no difference
between the theory of knowledge
and epistemology epistemology is the
theory of knowledge that's the
definition thereof
constructive theory and theory of
knowledge just saying the
intersectionaries evolution no you've
got David Deutsch at the intersection of
all these things
well
no
they're I don't know where to begin
unfortunately Tim in where to roast this
it's a good look
there are there are some things
there that might be worth preserving
uh
uh you're on air chat we could talk
about it there let's say that but it'll
take me too long now to
tell you what I think might be wrong
here okay
rational flanner has asked for me to say
a few words on the Mexico aliens Maybe
these Mexico aliens oh my goodness yeah
I looked at the I just looked at how
ridiculous
these things are
um wow
I don't I don't have anything to say but
it's it's just I it's it's a weird
it's a 2023 version of Bigfoot
this alien stuff
I remember you know back in the 80s and
the 90s people were very excited about
the Yeti and Bigfoot the Abominable
Snowman and all that sort of stuff
um
but it was all nonsense then this is
nonsense now
it
could there be alien intelligence
absolutely there could
were these bodies that were found
evidence of anything no they're just
fakes
like pictures of ghosts and stuff yeah
um Bart has asked what is an error or
mistake in papyrian epistemology so uh
well what is the concept of mistake know
who mistakes in preparing a personality
yes uh Logan has said
that it's a conflict with reality I
prefer to say
and I'm leaving this too long too late
but I should have I'm going to have to
come back to this it's been nearly two
hours that I've been talking now so I'm
just going to do this give this short
shift
but
problems are conflicts
in our ideas that's what a problem is in
preparing epistemology what's the
problem it's a conflict that you have
you've got this idea about the
observation you made that's a theory you
can have a theory about how observations
work
and then you have a theory about how
the world Works your explanation
that's a problem
so you know my Trope example as always
you've got this explanation of gravity
that tells you where Mercury should be
as it's orbiting the Sun
and then you look and Mercury is not in
the place where Newtonian gravity says
so you've got this problem
a conflict between your ideas the idea
on the one hand that tells you how
gravity governs the motion of objects in
space like Mercury going around the Sun
and on the other hand you've got this
theory of what you've observed where
Mercury is now either of these things
could be wrong they both could be wrong
on the one hand your theory of gravity
could be wrong mutant sea of gravity or
on the other
you've just not observed Mercury
properly there's something wrong with
your telescope there's something wrong
with the dates and times all this kind
of stuff could be an error
they could both be wrong as it turned
out
just the theory of gravity was wrong
Newtonian gravity was incorrect
Einstein's
new theory of gravity was correct and
when you use that to predict where
Mercury should be
it corrected
he
the prediction
It produced a prediction which correctly
allowed you to figure out where Mercury
should be night after night after night
after night when you're looking
so that's the concept of a mistake a con
the concept of a mistake or an error or
a problem
in popularity epistemology is a
conflict in our ideas about reality
that's what I would say a mistake is
you don't know that there's a mistake
all you know is there's a problem
it could be a mistake with your
observation it could be a mistake with
your theory or it could be both
and you've got a problem until you
resolve it
yeah
I think that solves that
keep on going
uh jiton has asked there's the brain and
there's the mind and things can go wrong
with both when problems with the Mind
occur example paranoid delusions are
they at bottom problems with wrong ideas
how are these then different from more
ordinary wrong ideas end quote
this is a good one for Michael Golding
who is a psychiatrist
rare kind of psychiatrist who is trained
in the papyrian tradition
and
I would say I'm not an expert in this
obviously
but paranoid delusions could be of both
kinds on the one hand they could be
literally brain errors near the grass
Tyson talked about this that instead of
calling it optical illusions you should
call it brain errors your brain can't
figure stuff out I would say paranoid
delusions could be of that kind there's
literally something going on physically
with your neurons making you think
you're seeing things or hearing things
when in fact you're not it's just the
misfiring of neurons so it's a physical
problem
and or
it could be a problem with the ideas so
at the level of software it's not so
much a misfiring
physically of neurons
of the visual cortex making you think
you're seeing things when you're up
there or misfiring of the neurons that
are in the auditory part
of your brain processing information
making you think your processing
informational in fact there's nothing
there
it could just be ideas it could be
software as well
so you're not thinking you're not being
sufficiently critical
and this can happen as well
I can imagine a situation where people
are thinking they're seeing a ghost
having a delusion but if they just
thought a little bit more carefully if
they tried harder
then
they could resolve this problem with
their own thinking
but I fully concede there can be
situations perhaps the majority thereof
where all the thinking in the world
doesn't remove the fact that you're
you've got this very strong illusion
delusion of seeing things that aren't
there because your visual cortex is
literally
firing away making you think you're
seeing stuff that isn't there or hearing
voices that aren't actually being spoken
and so on Etc
I can certainly imagine that
but Michael golden would have more to
say about that perhaps I should talk to
him Arjun kamani has talked about
uh talk to him on his own podcast about
this well worth listening to Mark
Golding because he is as I say a rare
doctor a rare psychiatrist
who understands popular epistemology if
only more did if any more did yeah
holidays by the way Jason asks how are
these paranoid delusions
different from more ordinary wrong ideas
well it depends as I would say if it's a
brain mistake
then that's not like an ordinary wrong
idea an ordinary wrong idea is just
you've got it's not a brain mistake it's
not a hardware issue it's a software one
it's you
thinking you've got a good explanation
in fact there's something wrong with
your good explanation
paranoid delusion is
you don't even realize you're making a
mistake you for all the world think
your
you know seeing the world as it is
to some extent
uh
but
that itself is an error
you're not seeing anything like what the
world is of course that can be true
under normal circumstances as well okay
we're not this is Donald Hoffman's
incorrect extrapolation he correctly
concludes that we don't see reality as
it is but then incorrectly extrapolates
from that that reality therefore is
nothing like
our ideas about it but that's wrong we
can converge with reality
even if we can never get to base reality
separate issue
okay
let's keep going
wow there's more questions
um I'm I'm
let me go to the questions that have
been asked now on
YouTube the chat here
ashik has asked
how are you doing this was back two
hours ago now at this moment back then I
was fine at this moment getting tired
uh
ah Blue Horizon has asked is GPT for an
advancement towards AGI been talking
about about
this exact thing with Naval and others
on etcher go to edger all of the stuff
is saved there as this will be saved as
well
and we have said I have said in
particular
no
no I'm I'm highly impressed by
gpt4 by chat GPT I think it's
astonishing it worked amazing
it's more impressive than a chess engine
or
a Google card a table to drive
but are any of these things
closer to
GI no
nothing like AGR
as I said recently on Twitter
we are diverging in terms of chat GPT
from people rather than converging the
more proficient the chat engine becomes
the less it makes mistakes
the better a chatbot it is
but
the less it's like a person
so
these things are wildly different
the person in the chatbot because the
chatbot will always do what you
instructed to do you ask it a question
you know give me a summary of The Lord
of the Rings and it will do that it's
not going to turn around and say I'm
bored of this conversation
can we do something else let's watch a
movie together
let's go play tennis Let's Take a Walk
no the chatbot's never going to do that
GPT four and five and six and seven and
eight nine and ten it's not going to do
that and insofar as it did do that we
would regard that as a terrible error
you'd take that code and you'd junk it
you'd go you know whoever it is Sam
Altman would say to his programmers
this chat Bots not doing what we want it
to do it's not responding to questions
anymore throw it in the bin get rid of
it
what we want is something that's going
to answer our questions
so
the GPT four five six seven eight nine
and ten are diverging from people it's
becoming a more and more proficient
accurate less error prone
responder to questions a better and
better search engine of a client that's
not what a person is a person makes more
and more errors is able to create and
disobey
it can turn around at any time if the
person another human being
your friend can turn around anything
home and say I'm bored of this can we go
do something else I'm going home I'm
sick of it I'd rather be doing anything
else but this responding to your
questions
GPT four and five is not going to do
that
it's always going to respond to your
questions and if it doesn't it's a bad
chat bot
so that's that we're not getting it's
not an advancement towards AGI in fact
it's the opposite but that's good you
want this technology
to be good at doing that thing namely
responding to questions you want the
chess engine to be ever better at
playing chess and nothing else you want
the Google car
to drive without making mistakes without
getting
drunk distracted angry whatever that a
human would you want to be perfectly
aligned with your instructions and if
you put all these things together
the chess engine the chat bot the Google
car driver and repeat for every single
thing a human can do that you know of
you're not getting closer to AGR either
because Sam Harris's great mistake on
all this
he says you just keep listing all the
capabilities of a human being
link them together and then by
definition you'll have a system which
exceeds us on every single metric that
you can write down except for one
The crucial one that all people can do
in the chatbot can't or that super
intelligence can't which is add another
task that no one's ever thought of
before to that list of programs
that's what we do we learn new stuff
J.R.R Tolkien invented whole languages
out of whole cloth just about
GPT 4 is not going to do that
you could ask it to do that
but that's a different thing it's not
going to do it off its own back
we routinely just do stuff for no reason
other than it arises from within us for
reasons we don't understand
this is goes back to my question about
someone else's question rather but my
idea that
ideas themselves arise from a kind of
singularity in the same way that the
Universe arose from
reasons we don't understand
our ideas are coming from a place sure
in our brains but we don't understand
where they're coming from
that's not like gpt4 yeah sure we can't
always explain
how gpt4 is doing what it does but
that's a separate question that's a very
separate question to the idea that ideas
themselves as generated by a person have
no antecedent in the world
gpt4 has code that the people at open AI
can point to and say this is how the
Transformer architecture works
there's nothing like that recipe for
what a person does okay
some Knuffle nut
um
[Music]
I've lost my spot here
um
let's keep on going
has asked
love your work how can someone work with
or for you that's very kind of you but
I'm not an employer
uh
or anything like that
um
so yeah I don't have a
business
um
I work with other people but I don't
employ anyone and I'm
yeah it's not something I'm
interested in doing either
yeah
I just like doing my own thing
yeah I have had periods in my life where
I've kind of been a manager of sorts but
as a security guard and as a like a
senior teacher and I couldn't stand it I
hated it
um so I didn't like people working for
me being in charge of people having that
kind of role of being a manager or
anything like that so yeah
let's keep on going well I'm sure you're
a lovely person
um you know uh gurav
um
yeah
hang out on air chat I keep signing up
here come to air chat and you might meet
people who know me and work with me and
then maybe you can yeah that would be a
good way to to hang out
knee 11s has asked quote
David Deutsch asserts people have the
capacity to explain anything but what
about being itself being as such
existence itself
uh okay Neil well what do you mean uh
we can explain anything that doesn't
mean we will in practice explain
anything in principle we can in practice
we only ever explain a finite number of
things can we explain being itself
in principle yes sure we can explain
anything anything that exists in the
world including being
must be explicable
doesn't mean we'll have the answer no
we can always fail we can try and fail
that's part of this whole thing
Daniel Anderson
has asked off topic yes but what is your
workout routine
um
so I used to be quite strict on this
whole thing of you know
follow
Arnold Schwarzenegger's routine I'd buy
these
magazines
muscle and fitness and so on back in the
90s the early 90s and follow
bodybuilders routines and
then I sort of developed my own way of
doing stuff and
I'd do weight training then I do running
and I do sprinting and I have a routine
now I just do whatever's fun that's my
over action criteria
I do weights
five days a week something like that
uh upper body lower body mainly upper
body I do
chest and shoulders so do back and
biceps I do
deltoids traps
how do deadlifts
I do
thighs and hamstrings that are calves
there's squats are doing everything
but I never want to get bored
that's the key thing you know there are
some people out there like I know Jocko
willink I listened to him he just does
the big gross movements
so he just does deadlifts squats
that's kind of it oh pull ups you know
chin UPS
that kind of thing and that works for
him
made us sprinting and that kind of thing
you know other people I admire in this
area do different stuff but now I just
do whatever I find fun and as soon as it
starts to get boring that's a signal for
me ah do something different
I used to do a lot more running and now
I do a lot more walking
because because
I'm time Paul
and again I like to have fun and so I
need to listen to my audio books
podcasts
music and so I combine that with working
out and I find that especially if I'm
listening to audio books and podcasts I
want to concentrate
on what I'm listening to and I can't do
that while I'm also running I can run
and listen to music that works well
but
I've never liked running to be honest
jogging and long distance running
even though I was really good at it at
school
and when I was younger I used to win
like you know the the long distance
races especially
we'd call it cross-country at school
anywhere from like two kilometers up to
10 kilometers I'd always be great at
that
but although I was good at it I hated it
I never enjoyed it
and then there was a period of my
late 20s early 30s where
I both was good at the long distance
running and I enjoyed it because I
figured out
just a way of enjoying it you can learn
to enjoy stuff that you don't like
specifically
I'd have the smartphone
something like that
would monitor my running and I'd also
have music and that would be fun because
I could
have a a goal for one of another word
you know like let's try and get this 10
kilometers running done in under 50
minutes be hard work to do that
but I managed to get my times down to
that and listen to this cool music dance
music often so that I could do that that
would be fun
but that only lasted for so long and now
at my age now
I don't like running I just realized I
was coercing myself into trying to like
running because everyone said you should
run you should run all these
smart fit people would say you should
run and it's good for you now I just
think I I just much prefer walking and
doing weights and that that works for me
much better than trying to force myself
into running
that's that
um Neil has also asked again
to what extent can David Dodger's notion
of explicit knowledge and implicit
knowledge be equated with these Notions
of the conscious mind and the
subconscious mind respectively
uh so he had this wonderful conversation
with Lily where they talked about this
kind of thing
and
the idea of I wouldn't say implicit
knowledge implicit is different to
inexplicit implicit is that you can make
it you can easily make it explicit it's
just that it's a thing that is there in
the background of your explicit
knowledge whereas inexplicity is
something you don't even know how to
make it explicit yet
uh the subconscious mind
consists of a whole bunch of things that
are in explicit knowledge
and a very powerful motivator for your
behavior
you can't put into words while you're
doing what you're doing and Lily talks
about this a lot in her conversation
with David so I would look at that
uh
Alex has asked hey Brett have you read
Walter isaacson's new biography on musk
no Alex I haven't sorry
Bart has done out of 10 euros to me
thank you but that's very nice of you
um and to everyone who donates and
supports me
uh
ask Christensen has asked
in beginning of infinity David Deutsch
explains that if two people from two
multiverses
were to mate it would be the same
universe I have heard I have a hard time
wrapping my mind around this can you
expand
end quote
um
yeah okay
once
two physical systems are able to
interact that includes two people
then they're occupying the same space
and so therefore by definition they're
in the same universe
I can't be much more explicit than that
if it's possible for things to interact
they must be part of the same universe
so if two people meet they're physically
interacting
if you're not able to physically
interact
in principle
with another person although they exist
in a Multiverse somewhere then you're
not part of the same universe
yeah Neil has asked again
would you do a video in which you
explain all the steps in the argument
from the Turing principle through to the
capacity of people for Universal
explanation
no because I don't know what that would
take that is a recipe for AGI and if I
knew that I'd be a very wealthy person
and yeah so there's not like I can't
explain how to get from the true
principles through to Universal
explanation
that's the question of AGI okay how do
you move from here's your Basic Hardware
that is the
turing machine
and here's a person able to create a
general creatively generate explanations
how do you get from one to the other I
don't know your guess is as good as mine
at the moment
Paul eloff
has asked do the Aussies suck at rugby
now because of all the good ones play
footy instead
what's 40
to me footy is
rugby league
that's the real football do you mean
AFL do you mean soccer what I would call
soccer
okay I don't follow Rugby Union which is
what people usually mean by rugby I
don't follow
football although I really enjoyed
watching the matildas play and the
Women's World Cup
uh
I don't follow AFL at all
uh you know that's Australian rule
support but I do follow rugby league in
Australia which is different to Rugby
Union
uh I imagine very few Americans know the
difference between those things
uh it's the only sport aside from tennis
that I kind of follow
I have my team St George Dragons red and
white
um and so I like rugby league the
season's over now for the year pretty
much certainly the dragons are out so
I've lost all interests whatsoever
let's keep on going
Aaron Martin I want to understand better
how minds are like computers is it that
minds are input output devices and
because there is only one mode of
computation must therefore be computers
well I've talked about this a lot
already in today's episode
Aaron
uh mines are software computers are
Hardware
so that's the distinction there but
again why is there only one mode of
computation how would it look like if
there are two different modes well there
are two different modes of computation
there's classical computation and
there's Quantum computation these are
two different modes of computation
uh Aaron has asked I upvote Neil Evans
request about the Turing principle
through the universal explanation so do
I but again if I knew
how to answer it I would have a recipe
for AGI
um
uh let's keep on going if I kneel and
Aaron are having a nice little
conversation themselves
Krista and Neil our people communicate
with on more platforms than just YouTube
again I recommend it sounds like I'm
doing an advertisement I'm not I just
think it's a cool platform if you want
to talk to me better than Twitter better
than YouTube go to air chat because we
can have a phone call conversation it's
asynchronous it's fun that's where I
like to hang out
it's when the vale is as well by the way
you can talk to him in person the Navara
and a whole bunch of other people I'm
going to try and get some more people on
there soon over the next few months
because I just think it's fun
okay
um
fristo has asked that question Brett
uses their chat often correct I do
Muhammad
barbecue has asked what is the minimum
knowledge of axioms on AGI should start
with I don't know
if I knew that again I would have a
recipe for AGI
um
Carlos Gonzalez has asked what are your
most favorite books or stuff anything
fun on everything interesting to you
like a list of books or people or
theories and ideas uh I should have
something like this on my website really
shouldn't I
um but you know
it's the standard stuff I always talk
about
the work of David Deutsch the work of
Carl popper then as far as science goes
the work of Richard fireman the work of
Paul Davies
there's a whole bunch of other books
that I find really interesting but
they're all esoteric kind of
the astronomy books things like Rare
Earth by Warden Brownlee any of the
papers and talks and stuff by chai
lineweaver
um I like iron ran stuff and then you
get into fiction and I like everything
by Tolkien
um so I could talk about that for ages
but I'm not going to maybe another time
I said don't you think that criticism of
being a bit dogmatic towards today's
critical rationalist Community after
being revitalized by Deutsch is somewhat
Justified
uh as it that's a perverse question
because Justified is something that the
critical rationalists reject this whole
concept of the possibility of being
justified
um
so I'm not sure if you're saying other
critical rationalists a little bit
dogmatic some are absolutely
but that's just like every single
intellectual or other movement that
exists out there we're just talking
about sport before people are
dogmatically aligned with certain
sports teams or political movements and
philosophical movements even the most
anti-dogmatic of all the fallibles and
the critical rationalists
because people you know human beings
will be human some of them will be
dogmatic
some of the most authoritarian people
are great proponents of
um
taking children seriously and yet those
those movements are ostensibly opposed
to each other right the whole concept of
taking children seriously is
anti-authority
but
I also see some people who claim to be
great proponents of taking children
seriously
also very dogmatic and authoritarian
when it comes to expanding these ideas
they turn people off it
some people who are great proponents of
popper
are also
bizarrely dogmatic
and I would say anti-semitic in places
which makes no sense but hey humans will
be humans we're filled with
contradictions what can you do
is it Justified to call these people
dogmatic yeah
but you know we're all filled with
errors
jiten what kind of music do you listen
to everything my favorite if I'm out for
a run or a walk is going to be
um dance music of some kind trance
from everything from modern day back to
the 90s even the 80s
my favorite era is sort of late 90s
early 2000s dance music there's a
a radio station radio
station on Apple music called classic
dance that's one of my favorite ones
because it's got late 90s early 2000s
trance and dance music
but I like
classic
uh you know Vivaldi Mozart but all the
popular stuff
right really when I say popular now
Pachelbel's Canon uh Vivaldi's concurred
her for two violins that kind of thing
so pop classic music
I like 80s and 90s music
50s 60s and 70s stuff because that's
what my mother and father would listen
to and so of course that evokes Pleasant
childhood memories I grew up in the 80s
and 90s so I like all of that stuff as
well I like a whole bunch of K-pop
that's what my partner listens to and
that's what we listen to like a front
end Saturday night
if we're sitting down and relaxing uh I
like modern stuff especially the Korean
music been listening to recently a whole
bunch of
um stuff from Turkey
uh I like yeah we listen to a whole
bunch of stuff from
worldwide stuff
I like Global Music that always finding
something interesting and new that's
modern
and then I'll often go back through you
know like Armenian music you know that's
popular today and then that'll lead us
down a rabbit hole of stuff that was
popular in Armenia over the last 10
years or Azerbaijan
or certain Ukrainian music Russian music
okay so all of that kind of stuff as
well
yeah
I like country music I like there's
there's very little that I don't like
maybe I don't like heavy metal
not so much
everything else great
um Alexander what is the difference
between the principles sufficient reason
explanation we talked about this okay
uh Blue Horizon has asked with
Multiverse you can set up an experiment
in which you have a 50 chance of dying
per second but you never experience that
in your Quantum immortality is it right
no
and I think there's Quantum immortality
thought experiments are valid because we
don't know what Consciousness is and we
don't know in particular the
relationship between consciousness
and the Multiverse
I don't know that
one has anything to do with the other
so because we don't know what
Consciousness is
shooting yourself in the head
and thinking you're going to survive
your Consciousness is going to be
preserved
in some measure of universes is
incorrect because we don't know what
Consciousness is but I would say
the best explanation is
you are not your copies so you have a
Consciousness now and if you shoot
yourself that's the end of your
Consciousness although copies of you
will still be conscious and survive
your attempted suicide that's not you
that's a copy of you copies of you are
not you that's that
um
Neil what is meant what I meant by being
any explanation okay yeah
um
uh yes
thanks Neil yep I'll I'll come back to
you at another time
um I think that's it I think I've been
through all the questions here on
um YouTube
I've been through all the questions so
far as I can tell
on
Twitter maybe I've missed some somewhere
um I can't see any more now
uh
and just check Twitter one final time
yeah
thank you to everyone but this has been
two hours and 20 minutes wow
um so that's more than enough time for
today but that's been a lot of fun so
maybe next week we'll do another one and
I'll get to I'll tidy up any questions
that I didn't get to uh today
um but thank you to everyone who's tuned
in I can see I've got 16 people I
haven't really been following exactly
how many people have tuned in
uh but I'm sure it hasn't been the same
16 people but for those who have been
with me for two hours and 20 minutes
thanks so much thank you to everyone
who's tuned in at any point and also to
those people who will be watching a
replay of this
and if you'd like to support me on
patreon
feel free find me
uh on patreon just type in Talk cast
patreon or Brett Hall patreon and you'll
find me
go to
www.brethold.org you'll see ways to
support me there
you can always donate to me via YouTube
I think as well and there's a PayPal
link
all that sort of stuff is much
appreciated
thanks Siri
but until next time thank you
and
good luck we'll have another word that
was a terrible way to sign off wasn't it
no have fun until we next talk again
bye-bye